.TH CDPLAY 1
.SH NAME
cdplay \- play audio compact disks
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBcdplay\fP [ \-\fBa\fP]|[\-\fBr\fP] 
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBCdplay\fP is an audio\-cdplayer it can be used interactively
or non-interactively. With no flags \fBcdplay\fP is used interactively. When 
used interactively \fBcdplay\fP can be either in non-playing or playing mode. 
In non-playing mode you can select tracks to be played. In playing mode
\fBcdplay\fP shows the track-time, remaining track-time, total-time and 
remaining total-time.  
\fBCdplay\fP assumes the drive to be at \fI/dev/cd0\fP.
.PP
During non-playing mode the following commands are available:
.IP cursor-up/down
browse through the track-list 
.IP spacebar
add track to the play-list
.IP backspace
remove a track from the play-list 
.IP s
start playing the tracks in the play-list. When the play-list is empty
start playing from the current position in the track-list until the
end of the cd
.IP p
play the track on the current position in the track-list
.IP r
play all tracks in a random order (shuffle play)
.IP e
exit cdplay
.SH 
During playing mode the following commands are available:
.IP s
stop playing, return to non-playing mode
.IP spacebar
pause/resume current track
.IP cursor-up/down 
skip to next/previous track
.SH OPTIONS
When one of these options is used \fBcdplay\fP does everything in the background.
.IP \-a 
Play all tracks, \fBcdplay\fP tells the drive to play all tracks and then it
immediately returns to the user
.IP \-r 
Play all tracks in random order (shuffle play). \fBCdplay\fP forks of a new 
process which starts up a track, during that track it sleeps. When the track is 
finished it wakes up to start the next track and goes to sleep again. The 
parent process immediately returns to the user.
.SH BUGS
\fBCdplay\fP does not sense if a cd has changed, so don't switch cd's.
If you want to play another cd you have to insert the new cd and start \fBcdplay\fP
again.
.SH AUTHOR
Michel R. Prevenier (mrpreve@cs.vu.nl)
