.TH CP 1
.SH NAME
cp, cpdir \- file copy
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBcp [\fB\-pifsmrRvx\fR] \fIfile1\fR \fIfile2\fR\fR
.br
\fBcp [\fB\-pifsrRvx\fR] \fIfile\fR ... \fIdirectory\fR\fR
.br
\fBcpdir [\fB\-ifvx\fR] \fIfile1\fR \fIfile2\fR\fR
.br
.de FL
.TP
\\fB\\$1\\fR
\\$2
..
.de EX
.TP 20
\\fB\\$1\\fR
# \\$2
..
.SH OPTIONS
.FL "\-p" "Preserve full mode, uid, gid and times"
.FL "\-i" "Ask before removing existing file"
.FL "\-f" "Forced remove existing file"
.FL "\-s" "Make similar, copy some attributes"
.FL "\-m" "Merge trees, disable the into-a-directory trick"
.FL "\-r" "Copy directory trees with link structure, etc. intact"
.FL "\-R" "Copy directory trees and treat special files as ordinary"
.FL "\-v" "Display what cp is doing"
.FL "\-x" "Do not cross device boundaries"
.SH EXAMPLES
.EX "cp oldfile newfile" "Copy \fIoldfile\fR to \fInewfile\fR"
.EX "cp -R dir1 dir2" "Copy a directory tree"
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
.I Cp
copies one file to another, or copies one or more files to a directory.
Special files are normally opened and read, unless \fB\-r\fP is used.
\fB\-r\fP also copies the link structure, something \fB\-R\fP doesn't
care about.
The \fB\-s\fP option differs from \fB\-p\fP that it only copies the
times if the target file already exists.  A normal copy only copies the
mode of the file, with the file creation mask applied.  Set-uid bits are
cleared if the owner cannot be set.  (The \fB\-s\fP flag does not
patronize you by clearing bits.  Alas \fB\-s\fP and \fB\-r\fP are
nonstandard.)
.PP
.I Cpdir
is a convenient synonym for \fBcp \-psmr\fP to make a precise copy of
a directory tree.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR cat (1),
.BR mkdir (1),
.BR rmdir (1),
.BR ln (1),
.BR rm (1).
