.TH TERM 1
.SH NAME
term \- turn PC into a dumb terminal [IBM]
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBterm\fR [\fIbaudrate\fR]\fR [\fIparity\fR] [\fIbits_per_character\fR] [\fB\-\fIdial_string\fR] [\fIdevice\fR]\fR
.br
.de FL
.TP
\\fB\\$1\\fR
\\$2
..
.de EX
.TP 20
\\fB\\$1\\fR
# \\$2
..
.SH EXAMPLES
.EX "term 2400" "Talk to modem at 2400 baud"
.EX "term 1200 7 even" "1200 baud, 7 bits/char, even parity"
.EX "term 8 9600 /dev/tty01" "9600 baud, 8 bits/char, no parity, use tty01"
.EX "term -atdt12345 /dev/tty01" "Start with a command to dial out"
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
\fITerm\fR allows 
\s-2MINIX\s+2
to talk to a terminal or modem over RS232 
port 1.  The program first sets the baudrate, parity and character length, 
and then forks.
The parent sits in a loop copying from \fIstdin\fR (usually the console's
keyboard), to the terminal or modem (\fI/dev/tty00\fR).  
The child sits in a loop
copying from the terminal or modem (\fI/dev/tty00\fR) to standard output.  
Thus when
RS232 port 1 is connected to a modem, every keystroke typed on the keyboard
is sent to the modem, and every character arriving from the modem is displayed.
Standard input and output may be redirected, to provide a primitive file
transfer program, with no checking.  Any argument that starts with a minus
('\-') is sent out to the modem, usually to dial out.  \fITerm\fP accepts
several commands that are formed by typing the escape character, CTRL-],
and a letter.  Type CTRL-]? to see a list of commands.  The subshell command
is very important, it allows you to type in a ZMODEM command to transfer
data.  Do not quit \fIterm\fR to do this, or your modem line will be reset!
\fITerm\fP keeps the modem line open on file descriptor 9 while running the
subshell, so you can type
.PP
.in +.5i
<&9 >&9
.in -.5i
.PP
at the end of your ZMODEM command to connect it to the modem.
.LP
Important note: to use \fIterm\fR, it is essential that 
\fI/etc/ttytab\fR is configured so
that there is no shell hanging on \fI/dev/tty01\fR.  
If there is, both the shell and
term will try to read from \fI/dev/tty01\fR, and nothing will work.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR rz (1),
.BR sz (1).
