.TH CRONTAB 1
.UC 4
.SH NAME
crontab \- maintain crontab files for individual users
.SH SYNOPSIS
crontab [ -u user ] { -l | -d | -r file }
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Crontab
is the program used to install, deinstall or list the tables
used to drive the
.IR crond (8)
daemon in Vixie Cron.  Each user has their own crontab, and though these are
files in /var, they are not readable or writable by anyone or anything
except the super-user or the
.IR crond (8)
or
.I crontab
programs.
.PP
If the
.I allow
file exists, then you must be listed therein in order to be allowed to use
this command.  If the
.I allow
file does not exist but the
.I deny
file does exist, then you must \fBnot\fR be listed in the
.I deny
file in order to use this command.  If neither of these files exists, then
depending on site-dependent configuration parameters, only the super user
will be allowed to use this command, or all users will be able to use this
command.
.PP
If the
.I -u
option is given, it specifies the name of the user whose crontab is to be
tweaked.  If this option is not given,
.I crontab
examines "your" crontab, i.e., the crontab of the person executing the
command.  Note that
.IR su (8)
can confuse
.I crontab
and that if you are running inside of
.IR su (8)
you should always use the
.I -u
option for safety's sake.
.PP
The
.I -l
option causes the current crontab to be displayed on standard output.
.PP
The
.I -d
option causes the current crontab to be deleted.
.PP
The
.I -r
option is used to replace the current
crontab (if any) with the contents of the named file.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
crontab(5), crond(8)
.SH FILES
.nf
/var/cron/allow
/var/cron/deny
.fi
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
A fairly informative usage message appears if you run it with a bad command
line.
.SH AUTHOR
.nf
Paul Vixie, paul@vixie.sf.ca.us
