.TH PS 1
.SH NAME
ps \(em display processes
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ps
.B \-acehjlmnrsuvwxSU
.B \-t\fP\fIxx\fP
.B \fIsystempath\fP
.B \fIswappath\fP
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBPs\fP shows information about running processes.
tty name or pid must be given after the last option, no space
between options and pid or tty, \fB\-\fP is optional.
.LP
Description of the displayed fields:
.IP PRI
priority, this is not the priority in task_struct, a low
number means that the process gets more cpu time if it can
run.
.IP NI
nice value, a positive value means less cpu time.
.IP SIZE
virtual image size, size of text+data+stack
.IP RSS
resident set size, kilobytes of program in memory.
.IP WCHAN
name of the kernel function where the process is sleeping.
.IP STAT
status
.RS
.IP R
runnable
.IP S
sleeping
.IP D
uninterruptible sleep
.IP T
stopped or traced
.IP Z
zombie
.IP W
process has no resident pages
.RE
.IP %CPU
percentage of cpu time / real time, this is different from UNIX ps
.IP %MEM
percentage of available memory in use by this process, the total of
all processes can exceed 100% because of shared pages. This is not
a decaying average as in UNIX ps.
.IP TT
controlling tty
.IP TPGID
current process group of controlling tty
.IP PAGEIN
number of major page faults
.IP TRS
text resident size, does not include shared libraries
.IP DRS
data resident size, includes dirty library pages and stack.
.IP SWAP
kilobytes (with \fB\-p\fP pages) on swap device
.IP SHRD
shared memory
.IP DT
dirty library pages (kb or # pages with -p)
.IP F
process flags
.RS
.IP 04
process has used math emulator
.IP 10
process is being traced
.RE
.SH OPTIONS
.IP \fB\-a\fP
show processes of all users
.IP \fB\-c\fP
show command name stored in task_struct
.IP \fB\-e\fP
show environment, cannot be combined with \fB\-e\fP option
.IP \fB\-h\fP
no header
.IP \fB\-j\fP
jobs format: pgid sid
.IP \fB\-l\fP
long format: flags, wchan, nice value, priority
.IP \fB\-m\fP
displays memory info (combine with \fB\-p\fP flag to get
number of pages): shared and swapped sizes, minor and major page faults.
The size field shown with this option is the size computed from the
page tables, it should be equal to the sum of SWAP and RSS.
.IP \fB\-X\fP
another format: displays the registers eip and esp, timeout and alarm
.IP \fB\-n\fP
numeric output for USER and WCHAN
.IP \fB\-r\fP
running processes only, these include processes in an uninterruptible
sleep
.IP \fB\-s\fP
signal format
.IP \fB\-u\fP
user format: gives user name and start-time
.IP \fB\-v\fP
vm format
.IP \fB\-w\fP
wide output, can be specified more then once
.IP \fB\-x\fP
show processes without controlling terminal
.IP \fB\-S\fP
add cpu time and page fault count from reaped children
.IP \fB\-U\fP
update psdatabase. The arguments syspath and swappath if given are stored
in the psdatabase and the symbol info is updated, if no system path is
given the path in the old psdatabase is used.
.IP \fB\-t\fP\fIxx\fP
only procs with controlling tty \fIxx\fP, use for \fIxx\fP
the same letters as shown in TT field. If \fIxx\fP is omitted
the controlling terminal of ps is used.
.SH FILES
/dev/kmem kernel memory
.br
/dev/swap swapdevice or (link to) swap file
.br
/etc/psdatabase symbol information
.SH "SEE ALSO"
kill(1)
.SH BUGS
Tty names are hard coded: virtual consoles are a1, a2, ...  serial
lines are s0 and s1, pty's are p0, p1 ...
.LP
%CPU and %MEM don't give decaying averages, %CPU is different from UNIX
ps.
.LP
Things can change while \fBps\fP is running, the picture it gives is only
a close approximation to reality.
.SH AUTHOR
Branko Lankester (lankeste@fwi.uva.nl)
.br
Initial man-page by Michael Haardt
