.\"{{{  Title
.TH ORIGAMI 1
.\"}}}
.\"{{{  Name
.SH NAME
origami \(em a folding editor
.\"}}}
.\"{{{  Synopsis
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B origami
.RB [ \-ehnopv?AV ]
.RB [ \-a<auto-save-delay>]
.RB [ \-k<namebase> ]
.RB [ \-l<line> ]
.RB [ \-m<markname> ]
.RB [ \-s<depth> ]
.RB [ textfile ]
.\"}}}
.\"{{{  Description
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B Origami
is a folding editor similar to the one included in the Inmos(c) Tds or
Parsytec(c) MultiTool Transputer Development Systems.  The major
difference is that Origami is public domain, the differences concern its
usage and more features, for example the macro language OCL. You can use
Origami for usual text files without control or escape codes, but you
can edit Tds/mtool files too.
.\"}}}
.\"{{{  Options
.SH OPTIONS
.\"{{{  -a <auto-save-delay>
.IP \-a<auto-save-delay>
Origami comes up in auto-save-mode.  If <auto-delay-time> is given, its
used for the delay.  Otherwise the standardvalue is used.
.\"}}}
.\"{{{  -e
.IP \-e
Origami does not echo the entered keys under the statusline.
.\"}}}
.\"{{{  -h ?
.IP \-h
.IP \-?
Origami displays all known commandlineoptions.
.\"}}}
.\"{{{  -k<namebase>
.IP \-k<namebase>
Origami reads the keybinding and the keybindhelp from files \&.origamirc
and \&.origamibind.  This option sets the files to namebaserc and
namebasebind.
.\"}}}
.\"{{{  -l<line>
.IP \-l<line>
Goto line after setting up.
.\"}}}
.\"{{{  -m<markname>
.IP \-m<markname>
Origami searches in the rcfile for a set of foldmarks named markname. If
there is no such markset given, origami will stop. Otherwise the marks
for folds are switched to the new ones.
.\"}}}
.\"{{{  -n
.IP \-n
All readings of files were done without searching for {\&{\&{, }\&}\&}
or :\&:\&:.  Folds can be used when editing, but there is no
folding-structure in the read file.  This allows to edit files which
contain these strings without confusing Origami.
.\"}}}
.\"{{{  -o
.IP \-o
Origami comes up in overwritemode.
.\"}}}
.\"{{{  -p
.IP \-p
Preprocessormode is on. Leading hashes are moved to first character in
lines. Reading such files moves hashes to correct indentation in folds.
.\"}}}
.\"{{{  -s<depth>
.IP \-s<depth>
Sets internal OCL stack to size depth.  Default is 64, which should be
enough for usual macros.
.\"}}}
.\"{{{  -v
.IP \-v
Origami starts in view-only-mode.
.\"}}}
.\"{{{  -A
.IP \-A
Automacros are enabled.
.\"}}}
.\"{{{  -V
.IP \-V
Origami starts in verbose-mode.
.\"}}}
.\"}}}
.\"{{{  See also
.SH "SEE ALSO"
Origami user manual \(em Contains a beginners section and all
functions including OCL.
.\"}}}
.\"{{{  Files
.SH FILES
$HOME/.origamirc \(em keybindings in Origami format
.br
$HOME/.origamibind \(em keybindings for describe-bindings function
.br
$HOME/.origamihelp \(em additional helpfile
.\"}}}
.\"{{{  Bugs
.SH BUGS
Origami expands tab characters to blanks.  This feature/bug forbids to
edit Makefiles with Origami, because make needs this tab stops.  If you
undelete a filed fold with another filed fold in it, Origami will be
confused.  If you are editing a empty file, change the language and save
the result, the file will contain a line with {\&{\&{ in it.  This only
happens with empty files, so it is not a serious bug.  Reading a file
with fold-structure needs searching for {\&{\&{, }\&}\&} and :\&:\&:.
This is done without checking the right 'comment-syntax' and will
destroyed files containing these strings.  Origami perhaps dies caused
by using such files without \-n.
.\"}}}
