.\" Copyright 1992 Rickard E. Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\" May be distributed under the GNU General Public License
.\" See section COPYING for conditions for redistribution
.TH MAN 7 "17 November 1992" "" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
man \- macros to format man pages
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B groff \-Tacsii \-man
.I file
\&...
.LP
.B groff \-Tps \-man
.I file
\&...
.LP
.B man
.RI [ section ]
.I title
.SH DESCRIPTION
This manual page explains the
.B "groff tmac.an"
macro package.  This macro package should be used by developers
when writing or porting man pages for Linux.  It is fairly compatible with
other versions of this macro package, so porting man pages should not be a
major problem (exceptions include the NET-2 BSD release, which uses a
totally different macro package).
.SH PREAMBLE
The first command in a man page should be
.RS
.sp
.B \&.TH
.IR "title section date source manual" ,
.sp
.RE
where:
.RS
.TP
.I title
is the title of the man page (e.g.,
.IR MAN ),
.TP
.I section
is the section number the man page should be placed in (e.g.,
.IR 7 ),
.TP
.I date
is the date of the last revision,
.TP
.I source
is related to the source of the command (e.g.,
.IR GNU ", " NET-2 ", " "SLS Distribution" ", etc.),"
and
.TP
.I manual
is the title of the manual (e.g.,
.IR "Linux Programmer's Manual" ).
.RE
.PP
The manual sections are traditionally defined as follows:
.RS
.TP
1
Commands (e.g., those commands that can be executed by the user from within
a shell)
.TP
2
System calls (e.g., those functions which must be performed by the kernel)
.TP
3
Library calls (e.g., most of the
.I libc
functions, such as
.IR sort(3) )
.TP
4
Special files (e.g., files found in
.IR /dev )
.TP
5
File formats and conventions (e.g., the format for
.IR /etc/passwd )
.TP
6
Games
.TP
7
Macro packages and conventions (e.g., a description of the standard file
system layout, and this man page)
.TP
8
System management commands (e.g., commands like
.IR mount (8),
which only
.I root
can execute)
.TP
9
Kernel routines (this is a non-standard manual section and is included
because the source code to the Linux kernel is freely available under the
GNU Public License and many people are working on changes to the kernel)
.RE
.SH FONTS
In some conventions, command names and options are in
.BR "bold face" ,
file names and variable names are in
.IR "italics" ,
and the rest of the text is in Roman.  Other conventions reverse the use of
bold and italics.  In general, you should try to make your usage consistent
throughout a document.  The commands to select the type face
are given below:
.TP
.B \&.B
Bold
.TP
.B \&.BI
Bold alternating with italics
.TP
.B \&.BR
Bold alternating with Roman
.TP
.B \&.I
Italics
.TP
.B \&.IB
Italics alternating with bold
.TP
.B \&.IR
Italics alternating with Roman
.TP
.B \&.RB
Roman alternating with bold
.TP
.B \&.RI
Roman alternating with italics
.TP
.B \&.SB
Small alternating with bold
.TP
.B \&.SM
Small
.LP
Traditionally, each command can have up to six arguments, but the GNU
version seems to remove this limitation.  Arguments are delimited by
spaces.  Double quotes can be used to specify an argument which contains
spaces.  All of the arguments will be printed next to each other without
intervening spaces, so that the
.B \&.BR
command can be used to specify a word in bold followed by a mark of
punctuation in Roman.
.SH SECTIONS
Sections are started with
.B \&.SH
followed by the heading name.  If the name contains spaces and appears
on the same line as
.BR \&.SH ,
then place the heading in double quotes.  Traditional headings include:
NAME, SYNOPSIS, DESCRIPTION, OPTIONS, FILES, SEE ALSO, DIAGNOSTICS, BUGS,
and AUTHOR.  The only required heading is
.IR NAME ,
which should be followed on the next line by a one line description of the
program:
.RS
.sp
\&.SH NAME
.br
chess \\- the game of chess
.sp
.RE
It is extremely important that this format is followed, and that there is a
backslash before the single dash which follows the command name.  This
syntax is used by the
.BR makewhatis (8)
program to create a database of short command descriptions for the
.BR whatis (1)
and
.BR apropos (1)
commands.
.SH "OTHER MACROS"
Other macros include the following:
.TP
.B \&.DT
Default tabs
.TP
.B \&.HP
Begin hanging indent
.TP
.B \&.IP
Begin paragraph with hanging tag.  This is the same as
.BR \&.TP ,
except the tag is given on the same line, not on the following line.
.TP
.B \&.LP
Same as
.B \&.PP
.TP
.B \&.PD
Set interparagraph distance to argument
.TP
.B \&.PP
Begin a new paragraph
.TP
.B \&.RE
End relative indent (indented paragraph)
.TP
.B \&.RS
Start relative indent (indented paragraph)
.TP
.B \&.SS
Subheading (like
.BR \&.SH ,
but used for a subsection)
.TP
.B \&.TP
Begin paragraph with hanging tag.  The tag is given on the next line.  This
command is similar to
.B \&.IP
.LP
.SH FILES
.I /usr/local/lib/groff/tmac/tmac.an
.br
.I /usr/man/whatis
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR groff (1),
.BR man (1),
.BR whatis (1),
.BR apropos (1),
.BR makewhatis (8)
