.\" +----------
.\" |	$Id: issue.m4,v 2.0 90/09/19 20:13:21 paul Rel $
.\" |
.\" |	ISSUE man page.
.\" |
.\" |	Copyright 1989,1990 by Paul Sutcliffe Jr.
.\" |
.\" |	Permission is hereby granted to copy, reproduce, redistribute,
.\" |	or otherwise use this software as long as: there is no monetary
.\" |	profit gained specifically from the use or reproduction or this
.\" |	software, it is not sold, rented, traded or otherwise marketed,
.\" |	and this copyright notice is included prominently in any copy
.\" |	made.
.\" |
.\" |	The author make no claims as to the fitness or correctness of
.\" |	this software for any use whatsoever, and it is provided as is. 
.\" |	Any use of this software is at the user's own risk.
.\" |
.\"
.\" +----------
.\" |	$Log:	issue.m4,v $
.\" |	Revision 2.0  90/09/19  20:13:21  paul
.\" |	Initial 2.0 release
.\" |	
.\" |	
.\" 
.\" +----------
.\" | M4 configuration
.\"
.\" +----------
.\" | local GETTY configurations
.\"
.\" 
.\" 
.\" 
.\" 
.\" 
.\" 
.\" 
.\" 
.\" 
.\" 
.\" 
.\" 
.\" 
.\" 
.\" 
.\" 
.\" 
.\" 
.\"
.\" 
.\" 
.\" 
.\" 
.\" 
.\"
.\"
.\" +----------
.\" | Manpage source follows:
.\"
.TH ISSUE 4
.SH NAME
issue \- issue identification file
.SH DESCRIPTION
The file
.B /etc/issue
contains the
.I issue
or project identification to be printed as a login prompt.  This
is an ASCII file which is read by the program
.IR getty (1m)
and then written to the terminal just prior to printing the
.I login:
prompt.
.PP
The line(s) may contain various
.BI @ char
and
\fB\\\fIchar\fR
parameters.  These are described in full in the
.IR getty (1m)
section PROMPT SUBSTITUTIONS.
.SH FILES
/etc/issue
.SH "SEE ALSO"
getty(1m)
